Clipboardchange explainer: Event payload and permissions updates to make support interop (#942)
MicrosoftEdge/MSEdgeExplainers: ClipboardAPI/clipboard-change-event-explainer.md

<!-- START doctoc generated TOC please keep comment here to allow auto update -->
<!-- DON'T EDIT THIS SECTION, INSTEAD RE-RUN doctoc TO UPDATE -->

- [clipboardchange event API explainer](#clipboardchange-event-api-explainer)

>   - [Authors:](#authors)

Author: This table of contents part got generated wrongly by vscode extension, will be fixed by using doctoc

#### 2.2.3 Multiple paste options in Google sheets
![](img/google-sheets.png)

### 2.2 Scenario: Sync clipboard with a remote desktop
When a user copies text or an image on their local machine, a web-based remote desktop application can detect that clipboard contents have changed by listening for the `clipboardchange` event. Upon detecting the change (which happens when 'clipboardchange' event is triggered on the web app when the page regains focus), the application can re-read the clipboard and send the updated clipboard content to the remote desktop environment.

![](img/sync-clipboard-scenario.png)

> ## 3. Motivation - Alternative to inefficient polling of clipboard

Reviewer: Would also be good to mention here again that polling will not work on Safari and Firefox due to the user gesture requirement.

Author: Done

Today, a web-app can monitor the system clipboard by polling and reading the clipboard through async clipboard API at regular intervals.
However, polling is not efficient and this feature aims to introduce an efficient way of notifying web apps when clipboard changes.
Additionally we must ensure that we monitor the clipboard only when absolutely required, that is, there is at least one document having required permissions and is listening to the clipboard change event. This will be described in design details.

## 4. Proposed Approach

> ### 4.1 Example javascript code for detecting clipboard changes:

Reviewer: We should list the IDL changes we are proposed along side the example. As is, it's hard to grasp the full extent of the proposal.

```javascript
  // Event handler for clipboardchange event which contains the data types present in clipboard
  function onClipboardChanged(event) {
    document.getElementById("text_paste_button").disabled = !(event.types.includes('text/plain'));
    document.getElementById("html_paste_button").disabled = !(event.types.includes('text/html'));
    document.getElementById("png_paste_button").disabled = !(event.types.includes('img/png'));
  }

  // This will trigger a permission popup for "clipboard-types-read" / "clipboard-read" (if choice not already provided)
  navigator.clipboard.addEventListener("clipboardchange", onClipboardChanged);
```

A sample web application which demonstrates the usage of "clipboardchange" event for showing available paste formats for rich web editors [Scenario 2.2](#21-scenario-show-available-paste-formats-in-web-based-editors) can be found [here](./clipboard-change-event-example-app.html).

### 4.2 Permissions and Interop - No user permission required 
 

> Today browser engines have different approaches to clipboard API permissions. While Chromium has [this permissions model](https://github.com/w3c/clipboard-apis/blob/main/explainer.adoc#clipboard-permissions) for clipboard, [Firefox](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard_API) and [Safari](https://webkit.org/blog/10855/async-clipboard-api/) rely on combination of user activation and user gesture for web pages to access user clipboard contents. This strict requirement is present because a user's clipboard contents are highly sensitive and can contain private data like passwords, security tokens. However, we will see that core scenarios involving clipboardchange event does not require complete user clipboard contents and hence we propose a more lenient permissions approach, that works in all browsers, for this new API. 

Reviewer: It's not clear from reading this paragraph what the proposal is. I guess it's mentioned in the section heading - "no user permission required", but it would be good to go into more details explaining the approach.

Author: Done

> **Permission prompt in Chromium**

Reviewer: Can this analysis be moved to an "appendix" like section at the end of the explainer. It's good information, but not the most important for a reader trying to understand your proposal.

![](img/chrome-permission-prompt.png)

**Permission prompt in Firefox**
![](img/firefox-paste-button.png)
 

> With ClipboardChange event API, event would be fired to indicate there was a change to clipboard. Without any additional data or information provided with this event, there shouldn't be any privacy concern as there is no data exposed. As no data is exposed, no permissions are needed. Now let’s consider the use cases outlined in the explainer, especially the dynamic contextual menus and buttons appearing or not appearing with different MIME types available on clipboard([Scenario 2.2](#21-scenario-show-available-paste-formats-in-web-based-editors)). For this just firing the clipboard change event is not sufficient. Developers will need to know the available MIME types on clipboard to provide such capabilities on Web Platform. And a developer can know the available types if the browser provides Clipboard MIME types as part of payload on the ClipboardChange event.

Reviewer: My general feedback here is that I think most of this can stated much more succinctly. Ex:

"The ClipboardChange event object will have a `types` member that lists all the available native formats available on the clipboard. Custom formats will not be included in this list to minimize fingerprinting risk."

You can then mention in 1-2 sentences on how the `types` can be used.

Letting the developers be informed about the presence of common data types (but not the actual data) like TEXT, PNG or HTML should not result in or add to security or privacy concern. However, same cannot be said for custom MIME types because if custom MIME types are exposed (without user consent) a web page can know which applications a user is working on and this information can be used to identify users by a malicious webpage. Hence if custom MIME types are provided in the clipboardchange event payload, the event needs to be gated by a user permission. Hence custom MIME types would not be available in the event payload. And with custom MIME types missing in the clipboardchange event payload, applications won't be able to show paste buttons related to custom MIME types for [this scenario](#21-scenario-show-available-paste-formats-in-web-based-editors).

##### Pros
1.) Simpler implementation and user experience with no permission prompts.
2.) Provides feature interop out of box without need to implement new permissions.

##### Cons
1.) No support for custom clipboard data types in the event payload which anyways is not supported on all browsers.
 
### 4.3 Page focus requirement

> We favour page required to be in focus to receive event, since this approach is inline with the current Async clipboard APIs and also reduces the possibility of misusing the clipboard change event in privacy related attacks. Also the approach has relatively lower resource usage.

Reviewer: Similar feedback as above, this can be stated much more simply. Ex.

"The clipboardchange event will not fire if the target document is not focused. If clipboard changes occur while the document is not in focus, a single clipboardchange event will be fired when the document comes back into focus. Historical clipboard change information will not be available, only the available types when the page gained focus will be included in the `types` member."

Author: Fixed, thanks

## 4. Proposed Approach

### 4.1 Proposed IDL and example javascript code:

#### 4.1.1 IDL changes
```typescript
interface ClipboardChangeEvent : Event {
  readonly attribute FrozenArray<DOMString> types;
};
```

#### 4.1.2 Sample JS code
```javascript
  // Event handler for clipboardchange event which contains the data types present in clipboard
  function onClipboardChanged(event) {
    document.getElementById("text_paste_button").disabled = !(event.types.includes('text/plain'));
    document.getElementById("html_paste_button").disabled = !(event.types.includes('text/html'));
    document.getElementById("png_paste_button").disabled = !(event.types.includes('img/png'));
  }

  navigator.clipboard.addEventListener("clipboardchange", onClipboardChanged);
```

A sample web application which demonstrates the usage of "clipboardchange" event for showing available paste formats for rich web editors [Scenario 2.2](#21-scenario-show-available-paste-formats-in-web-based-editors) can be found [here](./clipboard-change-event-example-app.html).

### 4.2 Clipboard data types - Available in event payload

> The ClipboardChange event object will have a types member that lists all the available native formats available on the clipboard. [Custom formats](#64-custom-clipboard-data-types-and-clipboardchange-event) will not be included in this list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The ClipboardChange event object will have a `types` member that lists all the available native formats available on the clipboard. [Custom formats](#64-custom-clipboard-data-types-and-clipboardchange-event) will not be included in this list.
```

```typescript
interface ClipboardChangeEvent{
  types: Array<string>; // MIME types available in the clipboard when the event was fired
}
```

> The types member can be used to detect available data types present on the clipboard and then reflect the same on the UI as per [this scenario](#21-scenario-show-available-paste-formats-in-web-based-editors).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `types` member can be used to detect available data types present on the clipboard and then reflect the same on the UI as per [this scenario](#21-scenario-show-available-paste-formats-in-web-based-editors).
```

### 4.3 Clipboard contents - Not available in event payload

This API doesn't intend to provide any user clipboard contents as part of the event payload.

### 4.4 Permissions and Interop - No user permission required 

> When fired, this API intends to indicate that the clipboard has changed and provides the current MIME types present on the clipboard. Since no data exposed, there is no need for user permissions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When fired, this API indicates that the clipboard has changed and provides the current MIME types present on the clipboard. Since the actual contents of the clipboard are not exposed, there is no need for user permissions.
```

##### Pros
1.) Simpler user experience with no permission prompts / user gesture requirements.

> 2.) Provides interop out of box without need to implement new permissions.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
2.) Provides interop out of the box without need to implement new permissions.
```

## 4. Example javascript code for detecting clipboard changes:

### 4.1 Paste options detection

```javascript
  // Event handler for clipboardchange event which contains the data types present in clipboard
  function onClipboardChanged(e) {
    document.getElementById("text_paste_button").disabled = !(e.clipboardData.types.indexOf('text/plain') > -1);
    document.getElementById("html_paste_button").disabled = !(e.clipboardData.types.indexOf('text/html') > -1);
    document.getElementById("png_paste_button").disabled = !(e.clipboardData.types.indexOf('img/png') > -1);
  }

  // This will trigger a permission popup for "clipboard-types-read" / "clipboard-read" (if choice not already provided)
  navigator.clipboard.addEventListener("clipboardchange", onClipboardChanged);
```

A sample web application which demonstrates the usage of "clipboardchange" event for showing available paste formats for rich web editors [Scenario 2.2](#22-scenario-show-available-paste-formats-in-web-based-editors) can be found [here](./clipboard-change-event-example-app.html).

## 5. Event spec details and open questions
 
### 5.1 Permissions and Interop
 

> Today browser engines have different approaches to clipboard API permissions. While Chromium has [this permissions model](https://github.com/w3c/clipboard-apis/blob/main/explainer.adoc#clipboard-permissions) for clipboard, [Firefox](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard_API) and [Safari](https://webkit.org/blog/10855/async-clipboard-api/) rely on combination of user activation and user gesture.

Author: Done

 
 
**Permission prompt in Chromium**
![](img/chrome-permission-prompt.png)
 
With ClipboardChange event API, event would be fired to indicate there was a change to clipboard. Without any additional data or information provided with this event, there shouldn't be any privacy concern as there is no data exposed. As no data is exposed, no permissions are needed. Now let’s consider the use cases outlined in the explainer, especially the dynamic contextual menus and buttons appearing or not appearing with different MIME types available on clipboard([Scenario 2.2](#22-scenario-show-available-paste-formats-in-web-based-editors)). For this just firing the clipboard change event is not sufficient. Developers will need to know the available MIME types on clipboard to provide such capabilities on Web Platform. And a developer can know the available types in following two ways:

1.) Use Async clipboard APIs to read clipboard for MIME types every time ClipboardChange event is fired.

> Challenge with this would be interop: In case of Firefox and Safari, with current user activation + gesture approach, end user will see a paste button (user gesture requirement) to allow reading clipboard every time developer tries to read clipboard when clipboard changes. And this would not facilitate the use case of dynamically updating context menus without any user intervention.

Author: done

#### 5.1.1 New permission approach: Requires proposed ‘clipboard-read-type’
Browsers can introduce a new permission, called "clipboard-types-read" (there is also some precedence for this with how Firefox has [this permission model](https://support.mozilla.org/en-US/kb/does-firefox-share-my-location-websites?redirectslug=does-firefox-share-my-location-web-sites&redirectlocale=en-US) for accessing location services)
Note: Browsers that already have permissions model for clipboard (e.g., Chromium) could also use the existing “clipboard-read” permission to gate the clipboardchange event, however, for interoperability we prefer even these browsers to introduce a new permission if this approach to clipboardchange API permission is taken.

##### Pros
1.) Facilitates interop.
2.) Supports providing custom clipboard data types(along with standard MIME types) with event payload.

##### Cons

> 1.) Complex user experience involving permission prompt.

Author: Removed the permission prompt alternate, resolving

### 6.2 Permission prompt mechanism in various browsers

Today browser engines have different approaches to clipboard API permissions. While Chromium has [this permissions model](https://github.com/w3c/clipboard-apis/blob/main/explainer.adoc#clipboard-permissions) for clipboard, [Firefox](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Clipboard_API) and [Safari](https://webkit.org/blog/10855/async-clipboard-api/) rely on combination of user activation and user gesture for web pages to access user clipboard contents. This strict requirement is present because a user's clipboard contents are highly sensitive and can contain private data like passwords, security tokens. 
 
**Permission prompt in Chromium**
![](img/chrome-permission-prompt.png)

**Permission prompt in Firefox**
![](img/firefox-paste-button.png)

### 6.3 Reading clipboard contents within the clipboardchange event handler

> To get the changed clipboard data within the event handler, the [read](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#dom-clipboard-read) or [readText](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#dom-clipboard-readtext) methods of the [Async clipboard API](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#async-clipboard-api) can be used, given the web page has sufficient permissions. Note that in browsers which don't have permission based access to clipboard (like Firefox), a call to async clipboard read might require user gesture like clicking paste tablet. In those browsers, web authors can instead show a "Sync" button on the UI, which can be enabled upon receiving clipboardchange event and disabled again once user clicks the "Sync" button. 

Reviewer 2: > In those browsers, web authors can instead show a "Sync" button on the UI, which can be enabled upon receiving clipboardchange event and disabled again once user clicks the "Sync" button.

I'm not sure that any special UI is needed for this. I would expect that they would just use the normal clipboard read dialog in these cases. It also might not be easy to consistently show a different UI for this case since browsers might not always be able to tell when clipboard read is being done as a reaction to `clipboardchange` or not. For example in clipboardchange a developer might queue an asynchronous task to update the clipboard. The browser wouldn't really be able to tell in that case that the clipboard read call is coming from `clipboardchange`.

Author: Thanks for reviewing. A web page defined UI is needed because in Firefox / Safari, async clipboard read API requires user gesture to call the API. Moreover, calling the clipboard read API in these browsers would show a browser generated paste button which needs to be clicked by user in order to allow access to this API everytime the read call is made. Without the sync button, 1. this popup will not be shown if user activation is not true 2. Even if shown, it will be annoying for users to see this appear without them performing any action. Hence this approach (which is not optimal) is suggested for browsers which don't have permission model for clipboard like Chromium.

### 5.3 Event details 
Since the clipboardchange event is not triggered by a user action and the event is not associated to any DOM element, hence this event doesn't bubble up and is not cancellable.

#### 5.3.1 Clipboard contents

TL;DR - Clipboard contents are not present as part of this event's payload. 

To get the changed clipboard data within the event handler, the [read](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#dom-clipboard-read) or [readText](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#dom-clipboard-readtext) methods of the [Async clipboard API](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#async-clipboard-api) can be used to get the current contents of the system clipboard. Note that in browsers which don't have permission based access to clipboard (like Firefox), a call to async clipboard read might require user gesture like clicking paste tablet. In those browsers, web authors can instead show a "Sync" button on the UI, which can be enabled upon receiving clipboardchange event and disabled when user clicks the "Sync" button. 

> Considered alternative - DataTransfer object: The [getData](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dnd.html#dom-datatransfer-getdata) method of DataTransfer interface could be used to retrieve the clipboard contents of a specific format. However this is not preferred since 1. It is not expected to change the clipboard contents within a clipboardchange event handler 2. It would be inefficient to attach clipboard contents for all formats on every clipboardchange event, especially if the content is large in size and multiple sites are listening for the event. Therefore, the only way to read clipboard contents within a clipboardchange event handler would be using the Async Clipboard APIs. 

Author: Makes sense, removed

#### 5.3.2 Clipboard data types

The data types available in the clipboard (that are accessible via async clipboard read API) after the clipboardchange event can be accessed in the event payload via "event.clipboardData.types" property. The clipboard types are part of the event payload since the types are limited which won't cause any data bloating. Further, this should not introduce any serious privacy concerns since it would be very hard to distinguish a user based on type of data copied to clipboard and there is a limited subset of types(that are accessible via async clipboard read API excluding custom data types) which will be present in the payload.

> ##### 5.3.2.1 API Signature Option 1: Use DataTransfer object of ClipboardEvent class

Author: Although not preferred, but if we go with this approach, it would return undefined value. Addressed in 5.3.2.1 API Signature Option 1

> As per the current spec, the clipboardchange event is a [ClipboardEvent](https://www.w3.org/TR/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-interfaces) that includes a [DataTransfer](https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/dnd.html#datatransfer) object as "clipboardData" property. This is similar to other clipboard related events like [cut](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-cut), [copy](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-copy) or [paste](https://w3c.github.io/clipboard-apis/#clipboard-event-paste) events. The clipboard types can be read using "clipboardData.types" property. However, methods to access actual clipboard data like "getData" won't be accessible.  

Author: Fixed, now just using W3 reference to show API signature and not that the spec states this fact.

### 7.1 Future permission prompting mechanisms

> In future, we may have additional ways of prompting the user for permissions - 1) By explicitly requesting for "clipboard-read"/"clipboard-types-read" permission, the API for this is still under discussion (https://github.com/w3c/permissions/issues/158). 2) The user can be prompted for permissions just before the browser dispatches the "clipboardchange" event. This way, the permissions prompt would appear only when required by the browser however web authors won't have control over when the prompt would be triggered which might not be desirable.  

Reviewer: When @ragoulik and I had chatted, we discussed potentially avoiding the `clipboard-types-read` permission from this proposal by simply never including custom formats in the `types` member of the ClipboardChange object. Did you all have a chance to discuss that further.
